# Ripping off their own wings, Loss aversion and why big businesses suck at pivoting

Go back in history and you'll find countless examples of behemothic pseudo-monopolies, ones who had all the talent and resources you could dream for, in the time-span of a few decades - if not shorter as technology speeds up the rate of change - lose drastic market share and dominance in their field to random new comers. IBM, Kodak, Blockbuster, Sears..

The new comers are still usually reasonably well funded and have a origin story where they had strong connections and access to funding, so it's not that simple, but still if you take the available resources they had and the resources the giants they eventually kill and replace had.. it's almost laughable.

This brings to question, why are these giants so easily outmaneuvered?

There are many ways of thinking about this question, I personally like to view it from a loss aversion perspective.

> Loss aversion is a tendency in behavioral finance where investors are so fearful of losses that they focus on trying to avoid a loss more so than on making gains. The more one experiences losses, the more likely they are to become prone to loss aversion. Research on loss aversion shows that investors feel the pain of a loss more than twice as strongly as they feel the enjoyment of making a profit.

Imagine you are meeting a friend at the park.

When you arrive you find the friend has some $5 ice cream they bought for you as a friendly gesture. Naturally you gain a small amount of happiness from this free $5 ice cream.

However, if you then dropped that ice cream on the floor in an un-salvageable way (maybe it fell on some dog poo), there's a good chance you would be more unhappy from the loss than the happiness you initially gained.

Now this might change depending on many things, for example in the sweltering heat of summer there's a good chance you'd be more annoyed than if it was a mild day on spring, or if you were on a diet you might think it's a good thing since you reduce caloric intake, or maybe the ice cream van your friend bought the ice cream from is nearby and $5 is nothing to you... but in general the trend remains relatively observable in humans, especially as the numbers go up.

### Losing 5% to X% is a lot bigger deal to big businesses

To survive and grow and flourish businesses have to endlessly pivot. 

A bear has to eat plenty during the summer months and build up fat reserves, so they have a better chance of surviving the winter months where food is more scarce.

In the longer run, the bear species might grow smaller and leaner due to the climate getting more adverse and resources becoming scarce.

A bird species in a environment with few land predators (such as islands) might even give up it's wings, since flight requires a lot of energy and food and the birds that try to keep their wings get outcompeted by those without.

Businesses no differently, have to constantly have to adapt to change in their environment, and many times like the above examples, one might have to give up things they idealize, or maneuver in such a way, that they end up hurting themselves in the short run.

Many times big businesses (BB) will be so big, that trying to pivot will feel no different to ripping off their own wings. Investing in a new avenue for growth, will eat away at the revenue they themselves generate elsewhere - even if the shepherds of the business are aware they have to do it eventually, it's easy to be naive and feel they have more than enough time only to be slapped in the face by exponential technologies - technologies that 'jump' out of nowhere, because all the bottle necks preventing them from emerging disappear at the same time, many times dominating the environment after (usually these are the technologies you need to watch out for in the first place). Best case, decision makers might invest minimally but stall and seek something perfect that 'deserves' to kill their own revenue sources, forgetting in business one only finds perfection after testing it out on reality, sucking many times until the feedback loop from working with users guides you towards the creation of something not bad.

And again, even if a BB recognizes that the environment is changing and they have to do things now, during the initial stumbling period periods it's easy to make mistakes and attract bad headlines. How much can a bad headline cost businesses?

Maybe nothing in the long run after we found out the business was making the right decision, in fact you should end up with a gain. Yet at that moment when the news is at the peak, it could result in many % losses in terms of 'shareholder value', during the worst moments of the cycle it can feel like the end of the world.

5%++ loss in shareholder value for a small singly focused business is painful but nothing if the decision makers truly believe in their products, it might be fair to say that to them that 5%++ loss is nothing compared to the true value of what they are working on - and in fact during these periods many businesses might jump up and down by many orders of magnitude as the public tries to judge their 'value'.

But that 5%++ to a $trillion company, one who tends to be made up of many clusters of decision makers, many of whom will be disparaged that 'your experiments' are causing harm on the rest of the business... it's incredibly painful, and it takes strong decision makers at the top to control the ship in moments like these - but like stated before, on average, given human nature, it's fair to say that the decision makers will likely make choices that minimise the loss, maybe until it's too late.
