# Why copyright might finally be on it's way out in the age of AI

So Japan recently established laws related to AI and
copyright which I've been told can be reduced to the idea that AI can be used for research, but not for infringement.

Given how valuable Japan's creative globally recognizable copyrights are, this is nothing controversial or surprising. 

But there are some big undercurrents to this story that some people might not have noticed yet.

<hr/>

## AI is great at mass producing new concepts of something similar yet dissimilar to an original concept.

<hr/>

Instead of 'Pikachu' for example you could ask your AI Art generator to design for you a 'cute electric thunder mouse'.

Sprinkling a few more creative words in the prompt and the generator, to add some noise.

Take a break, give yourself a pat on the back.

And the generator will do it's thing and output something similar yet dis-similar enough such that it would be difficult to prosecute.

The Pokemon Company is a behemoth in the world of copyright and one of it's moats has always been it's large catalogue of carefully crafted 'monster pets' - on average each being able to connect and appeal to fans of all ages and types, with every generation somehow introducing new fan favourites.

This depth is something that has been impossible to compete against by new competitors, and there have been some that tried. 

Yet from now on, given the right prompts, AI allows any random wannabe game developer to generate potentially millions of 'fakemon', many of which with a little brush up could do a decent job at competing with the catalogue that Pokemon has slowly built up over decades.

In fact there are already some fan made AI fakemon generators around. And at least I've been impressed.

In the end, concepts can be thought of as a collection of numbers in high dimensional space. AI just has to fiddle with each of the numbers a little here and there, and it can mass produce something very similar yet dissimilar.

Mass AI generation with a little bit of noise and luck can result in the easy generation of creative gold.

Instead of hiring an actor that costs $millions, movie creators might just get AI to create someone who looks 'similar' to them, yet dissimilar.

Instead of explicitly having Taylor Swift sing a song for you, you might get AI to generate a voice similar, yet dissimilar.

Obviously it's not that simple, or at least I assume it isn't because I'm not an expert in copyright.. but it'll be interesting to see what will happen.