# Horizontal scaling and Vertical scaling in game development

### Horizontal scaling requires lots of hard focused work or many people 

### Vertical scaling requires creativity, a lot more initial planning/setup, and a little bit of luck

Everybody loves games. Naturally I do to, and like most I occasionally get the inspiration to fiddle away and create a prototype of a game that seems interesting to me.

Only to inevitably end up losing motivation when mentally calculating the enormity of the work it takes to create a polished game.

Game developers to me are definitely the chaddest of the developers out there, especially solo/indie developers, given the range of skills required to produce anything good.

> Game quality = a1 * a2 * a3 * a4 * a5 * ...

### The pessimist would say:

**For all the good features a game has, it only takes some bad/mediocre ones to ruin everything (big number times 0 = 0).**

We can all remember games that looked like diamond, but were lacking in story, or a game with beautiful music but a boring world. A game with an amazing story, but lacking gameplay. A game with amazing gameplay, but too many cut-scenes and distractions that got in the way..

### The optimist would say:

**If you do a few things really well, everything else has to just be decent for it to combine into a suprisingly great result since the few good things can carry the mediocre.**

We can all remember upstart like games, that felt barebones on many levels, but other features provided such a suprising amount of depth and entertainment it didn't matter. (Slay the Spire, Vampire Survivors, addicting mobile games are some relatively recent examples)

Of course, if you get everything right, you likely have yourself a game of the year contender.

---------

I'm a casual hobbiest, so I'm more of an optimist trying to find a combination that is simple yet has a suprising amount of 'fun'.

So I've always felt the concept of horizontal scaling and vertical scaling very useful here to save myself from being side tracked with too much delusional thinking,

#### Avoid getting distracted by ideas that require too much 'horizontal scaling', especially things you know requires skills you lack.

This includes things like lots of hand crafted art, well thought out dialogue, beautifully designed out levels and in-game areas..

Content that is novel because there's a lot of it at a good level of quality (Maybe AI might help here in the future).

Of course it depends again, on your own/teams skillset. Great artists might in fact emphasise art and atmosphere since it's easier for them to output a lot of it and cut back on other things, great story tellers might emphasize dialogue but cut back on deeper gameplay mechanics. Great creatives might focus on crafting deep strategic gameplay, while forsaking story all together.

The key is, chances are you/your team aren't good at everything. Recognise what is easier for you to produce in great amounts at a good quality, and what is costly.

If you have the money you can always look to hire, try and develop what your team is lacking, or maybe look into modern AI and what it's capable off, but of course, that's not always possible. 

#### Try to emphasize features that in combination 'vertically scale', ideally things you know you are good at and results in a suprising amount of fun.

This includes things like adding strategic depth, upping replayability through things like rougelike mechanics, dropping in multiple story routes, increasing player challenge, or just upping the level of stimulus/atmosphere (maybe abusing dark patterns that abuse the way our brains are wired but let's not go there)..

Content that is novel because it adds depth hidden away for the player to explore, discover/master. More aspects to think over when making decisions, more trial and error to discover what works and doesn't, more upfront stimulation and sense of wow, upping the required brain cells needed to actually obtain victory..

Again, what your teams strengths are should define what features to emphasize here.

Slay the Spire - the deck building rouge like - to me is a great example of a game that has low horizontal scale, and high vertical scaling.
 - Minimized horizontal scale by avoiding adding too many 'screens', un-necessary 'travel/movement', mediocre and distracting 'story'. The art is decent, but nothing spectacular. We barely know anything about the lore. 
 - Vertical scaling is added via rouge like elements, desk building mechanics that encourage experimentation and discovery of new cards, items, what works, what doesn't. New monsters are slowly introduced, each with a unique mechanics that you have to comprehend and develop counters for..

The good is quickly emphasized, and the mediocre is quickly forgotton. Overall, resulting in a game that if one wanted to copy and paste, would be suprisingly easy and cheap to replicate, but did suprisingly well.